so i think in this very moment it can
really feel like we're at the end of
something or at least we really want to
be at the end of something we want to be
at the end of this pandemic for sure
and yet i feel in this very moment that
we are actually at the beginning of
something
we are at the beginning of changing the
rules of business and changing
what this next generation of workers
will experience inside of companies
and uh there's been this massive change
in how workers experience work over the
last year plus as so many folks have
been working from home and have actually
reported that they would rather quit
their jobs than be called back into
traditional offices and so
you have this opportunity in your
companies to actually rewrite
what the rules of work look like as
you're building the next generation of
companies and i want to talk to you
today about what that can really look
like and how you can shape this next
generation of work and actually make
your companies go so much further than
what i think you're currently dreaming
of
right now we are at the beginning of
this tectonic shift in work
and in the last 20 years if you think
about how the internet spawned
a generation of businesses that really
have been transformational in so many
ways
and think about what this next 20 years
of businesses will look like
how many of you think that the next 20
years will have actually more change
than the last 20 years
anyone are you the only one
i certainly think that the pace of
change is accelerating uh and that the
new businesses coming out with things
like
artificial intelligence cryptocurrency
decentralization
these technologies promise even more
disruptive change than what we saw in
the last 20 years and while the
specifics of these changes are certainly
up for grabs and the things that you and
your companies are building will be part
of this change one thing we do know is
that the rate of change is accelerating
and in an environment where the rate of
change is accelerating the key thing
will be for you and your companies to be
able to adapt and constantly build
companies that are adapting to an
environment of increasing change
and as that's happening the key is how
do you build a company that is
constantly capable of adapting what does
that really need to look like
and i would posit to you that the key
for this
is getting the team
all the time that is a team that can
adapt and building a company that has a
team that can constantly adapt because
as a business leader you know
that a key for you is always about
having that right team right you know
that for you success is having that team
and yet
how do you build a team that can adapt
how do you build a team that can flex
how do you build a team that constantly
needs to change
that is going to be a huge huge
differentiator for you and your company
over the next five 10 20 years and so as
you enter this new reality where change
is the constant
and you have to build a team that can
constantly change and frankly build a
constantly changing team
what does that need to look like
so i want to talk to you a little bit
about what that can look like in a time
when i think we've been focused in the
last year plus on this conversation
around where the work is happening but
really the critical differentiator for
you is going to be about who is doing
the work because that's what's going to
set you and your business apart in a
time of constant change and adaptation
so let's dive into this
why is who much more important than
where i'll tell you three reasons why
who is more important than where number
one
the war for talent has never been more
fierce
how many of you are hiring right now
that is almost everyone in this audience
i don't know any business leader that i
talk to today who is not hiring and yet
it is more difficult than ever before
and i would suggest to you the reason
it's more difficult is because most
business leaders are actually looking in
the wrong places and they're looking for
the wrong types of people and we'll dive
into that
number two
i think a lot of people are hoping that
they're going to wake up on january 1st
and say oh yes the great resignation
that was a thing of 2021
and now i'm in 2022 and it's in the past
well i have bad news for you the great
resignation is a permanent state that is
my belief
in 2020 we saw 20 million americans
joined the freelance workforce
this year we did a survey and 10 million
more americans are thinking about
leaving full-time work and joining the
employee the freelance workforce again
just because of the flexibility it
affords them so the great resignation is
not even just about employees going from
company to company it's actually about
people leaving the full-time employee
workforce all together and joining um
the full of the freelance workforce
because people are looking for so much
more flexibility and control over when
where and with whom they work so there's
a lot happening with employee 10 years
shortening and the workforce just
changing dramatically
and the third reason is around newer
generations in the workforce they are
looking for fundamentally different
things they know
that this is not about a career where
maybe they have a few long-term
employers and then they get a gold watch
in retirement generation z and younger
generations know that they are building
a career that looks very different in
terms of with whom and how and the
skills that they are really empowered to
build
and how they're going to craft a career
that looks very different with things
like the passion economy the creator
economy and things like that at the
forefront of how they build their
careers so if you want to attract
younger workers into your company you
need to be looking for those workers in
different places
so the best companies that are really
thinking about and understanding these
trends have shifted their hiring
functions from one around talent
acquisition and this idea that they can
own and control workers to really
understanding they have to have talent
access
and that they need to access these
workers in a lot of different places and
in different ways than older companies
have been doing so let's talk more about
that
there are a lot of companies that have
woken up to this idea of talent access
everyone from microsoft to airbnb to our
own company at upwork and i want to dive
into how we ourselves have built our
team uh with 75 freelancers at the core
of our business doing everything across
our company so let's talk about talent
access and what that really looks like
as a different way of dealing with
talent and really making talent part of
our strategy versus talent acquisition
so when i joined upwork i joined the
company 10 years ago we were a little
startup in redwood city i think we had
somewhere between 50 and 75 employees
we had at least that many freelancers on
our team at that time as well
distributed globally
and
today fast forward we're a public
company we have about 2 000 team members
75 of those team members are freelancers
they are distributed around the world
our team is in 86 countries globally
and we have intentionally designed
everything around our people processes
everything around how we operate to
really incorporate employees and
freelancers working together in an
integrated fashion on hybrid teams
and that has paid huge huge dividends
for us in terms of agility scalability
diversity creativity across the board so
i want to tell you more about how we've
done that and how you can do it too
first of all we have had to get past
some huge misconceptions
that exist today about the freelance
workforce and existed for so many years
uh how many of you have heard
some form or any of these misconceptions
i'm sure many of you have heard some of
these things like
ah freelancers aren't reliable like
they're going to be here bang on
tomorrow or there's no way i can build a
highly uh culturally competent company
if i have freelancers in many of these
roles
or
freelancers aren't really serious about
their work you know they're gig workers
things like that
um i can tell you as someone who's been
working and building teams for over 10
years um with freelancers these things
are absolutely not true and yet these
these perceptions exist
so let me tell you a little bit about
what is actually the truth instead of
these misconceptions
that exist
and absolutely drive me nuts that they
still do so
this is a little bit about our cx team
customer experience
so there's this myth that customer that
freelancers can't do high culture work
or can't do really integrated work
inside of a company well here's our cx
team it's 95 freelancers
and yet our attrition rate on the team
is less than 5 i think most cx teams
have usually turnover about 30 per year
this is an unbelievable stat if you
think that freelancers actually are
going to be here today gone tomorrow or
can't be highly acculturated in your
business
and
we have seen that the cul the
freelancers on our team
are highly attuned they are
geographically distributed so they're in
the places where our customers are
speaking the languages that our
customers speak they are highly
empathetic to our customers and really
are so passionate about our business and
our product that it just
pays huge dividends for us including our
csat score of 91
and the nps score that we have which is
really an industry-leading score i think
most you know staffing firms have an nps
score that they brag about being like 8
or 10.
so they deliver tremendous results for
us and are incredibly passionate about
what they're doing um they also are
rated and reviewed after every contract
upwork freelancers are so they're super
motivated to show up and do their best
work every day and that raises the bar
for everyone on the team including the
employees
um and many of them have worked with us
for as long or longer than most of the
corporate employees in similarly
situated roles so tremendous results
from our cx team
all right so you might say hayden sure
it can work in cx but what about
something like building your core
product that can't work you can't have
freelancers doing product engineering
work can you
well i ran our product team for four and
a half years and i can tell you that
absolutely you can have
uh freelancers in critical roles in
product engineering in fact we have more
than 350 freelancers doing remote
development for us on our core mobile
app our web apps and this has been a
huge part of how we scaled our business
over many many years
and
these folks are incredibly skilled and
talented you know there are highly
skilled uh freelancers who have advanced
math data science uh computer science
degrees in places like russia ukraine
canada all across the u.s outside of
silicon valley yes outside of silicon
valley highly skilled developers that we
have tapped into to build this team and
do incredible things
when i became the ceo of our company in
january of last year i had a very
audacious goal for us to go from being a
single product company to having four
products
and it was our remote development team
that included so many of these uh
freelance developers that really rallied
and said all right we're gonna do it and
within 12 months of setting that goal we
had launched three new product lines
really scaling that effort through
freelancers on our platform that we had
brought in for that effort so
tremendous results and i can say that it
wasn't just the scaling of the work that
came in through our freelance teams it
was also the creativity so it was a
freelancer from our site who had said
hey wait a minute i've got an idea for
how we can add a specific feature that
actually ended up driving a bunch of
conversion through one of these new
products and it was a freelancer on our
team who actually did the demo of one of
these new products in front of the whole
company that really led to this you know
zoom uh standing ovation you know zoom
standing ovation is like lots of people
on mute clapping and doing emojis and
the chat stream um so but it was these
freelance contributors who really are
just part of our integrated team doing
incredible work
for for us every single day
so you might say okay product
interesting engineering interesting cx
interesting
what about marketing well there were 10
months in 2019 when i was also our cmo
and uh we have had marketing
contributors from the freelance
community for years on upwork who do
incredible incredible stuff there are
tons of hollywood producers ad agency
folks um creatives who have actually
said hey i don't want to be working for
a big company i want to be out on my own
and they are on the upwork platform and
working for companies like us
doing incredible work and so we also see
that in the data professional
freelancers actually do more to upskill
themselves constantly than captive
employees do that's just a fact
so if you're looking for people who are
really sharp on their skills who are
current uh look to the freelancer
community because these people are
always staying up to date and plus
they're usually working with multiple
uh multiple clients so they're seeing
what's hot in the market what are other
people do they're bringing those ideas
fresh into your company and we see this
ourselves last year we set the goal of
rebranding and changing a bunch of our
marketing assets doing a big launch we
did this in about half the time changing
900 assets in our company
so much faster than we would have been
able to do with just an in-house team
because we were able to scale this
effort with freelance talent and even
though we have
employees on this team we brought in a
creative director of project managers
motion and graphic people from the
friends community to basically burst
this effort and get it out the door so
much faster than if we had just been
relying on ftes so the freelancers force
us to think bigger stretch our
aspirations and then actually give us a
lot more throughput as well to get
efforts like this out the door
so
what i can tell you
when you aren't burdened with thinking
about
how am i going to get this done i have
this huge thing like this rebrand effort
and i don't even know how to get it done
quickly when suddenly that is not your
barrier and you know i can get it done i
can do it fast i can do it twice as fast
as my competitors
suddenly this opens up for you
a new way of thinking about what's
possible for your business and that is
truly the unlock so it's not just about
having access to this talent it's about
suddenly having access to the
imagination and the dreams that you can
achieve for your business because how is
no longer
your constraint you can do more you can
go faster you can dream bigger and that
is i think the superpower that you get
from really tapping into the power of
the freelance economy for yourselves
i see this all the time and i want to
give you a little bit more in terms of
the tactics that you can use to really
unleash for your business so let's talk
about the playbook
first it starts with a set of mindsets
and beliefs
we know that number one you cannot be
restricted by geography because the
talent is everywhere it's not just in
your backyard number two
the team you need to build to really
unleash is not going to be homogeneous
it's going to be diverse it's going to
be diverse in every aspect location
background
nationality like all of it number three
uh you need to know that the independent
talent you bring in should not be
marginalized it can't just be doing you
know a bit of work on the edges you can
put people into core roles doing uh
really meaty things for you and your
business just like you have experts you
know advising you on you know your
health and your well-being like your
doctor your plumber whatever like those
experts are in your life you can put
those experts into play in your business
so
five
uh mindsets beliefs and activities that
you can put into place in your business
to really unleash on this so first
move your mindset from this idea of it's
only people in my region
two i will tap into anyone anywhere who
has exactly the skills i need and those
people are usually not going to be in
your region you may have been doing this
during the pandemic but the thing to
believe
is now
commit to this as not a pandemic related
activity commit to this idea that you
will find anyone everywhere
post-pandemic going forward because this
is how you really unleash again for your
business to getting the talent you need
regardless of location and
you can start small if this seems scary
start with a project that is you know
needing outside advisors or needing some
external eyes it might be something like
you have a learning and development
effort or you want to design a new
onboarding process get some freelancers
in to do that we've done that ourselves
and then these people can be people you
go back to again and again and have a
long-term relationship with
or maybe you're opening a new office or
doing some extra recruiting again i saw
all of you are basically recruiting
right now when we opened our chicago
office to build out a sales team of
employees
we actually brought in and quadrupled
the size of our recruiting team with
full full-scale sourcers um
administrators etc and basically burst
the capacity of our recruiting team for
a period of time using freelance uh
sourcers and assistance and then
basically brought that team size back
down as needed so you can do efforts
like that that really give you capacity
when you need it through the freelance
team
all right the second thing
uh if you
are thinking today about like your
onboarding process as only specific to
employees on your team
expand your aperture because if you're
using freelancers programmatically you
need to onboard them too and it doesn't
need to be six months of onboarding
because the good news is unlike your
employees who might only be onboarded
fully and delivering roi for you after
three to six months
your freelancers you can onboard in a
few hours and they're delivering roi for
you in a few hours which is amazing
because they are very fast and very
equipped to do that
but you need to give them the context
around your business around your
nomenclature around your culture so that
they can be part of the team and adding
value very quickly so expand your
thought process around how you onboard
all of your team members including your
freelancers so that they too can be
delivering results because they know
your organization they know what's
important your priorities anything
critical around what's going on in the
business context and then they can turn
around and use that to add a lot of
value so our investments around
onboarding freelancers and employees you
know in a similar fashion has really
paid off for us and even in examples
like our customer support team
one of the reasons why they have that
low attrition rate is because we've
onboarded them really well up front they
add a ton of value they're very
integrated and then you know that pays
huge dividends
number three um happy hours
you
you know that in-person events do not
translate uh really well uh virtually
and uh oops
um
oh sorry meetings for everything you
cannot have meetings for everything in a
distributed team setting so um
you need to move from this idea that
everything everything's gonna happen you
know like it did in person to just doing
it on zoom we know that from the
pandemic but what we've really seen is
committing to this practice of uh
asynchronous work deeply from the
tooling
google docs miro loom like all of that
is really important and really embracing
that first and foremost is huge
secondarily
having the practices and the rituals in
your company around how do you treat
freelancers in those settings and how do
you include them in
those types of
business context including the tooling
so our it team is equipped to give
freelancers access to tools make sure
that they're onboarded into those tools
on upwork we have a partnership with
citrix citrix can easily give
freelancers a virtual desktop solution
all of that works really well so that
freelancers again have the access to the
tools and everything that they need to
be successful and additionally
when when freelancers are in meetings
and in
all of these contexts you can do so much
with your distributed team to just take
a few minutes at the beginning to set
the context and to make sure you're
checking in with people as well on
you know how's your day how's your kid
doing what's going on in the background
there you know using those touch points
that are in person to build those
personal connections and then shifting
so much more of the work to be
asynchronous documented in jira and
other tools as possible as much as
possible so you have you know a few
hours a day which are for that critical
uh sync time you know we use for our
development teams 8am to 11am pacific
that's the time for agile standups you
know time face-to-face meetings and then
the rest of the stuff can happen flowing
through you know a 24-hour cycle where
people are doing a lot of communication
and connection that way so there's just
a lot you can do with those
being really strategic about what really
needs to happen in person what can
happen elsewhere and then be very you
know mindful that then people can flex
their schedules work on their own time
around things like that
i think also as you move towards the
future of work getting better and better
like all the tools that you're probably
building will just make virtual
uh meetings so much better than in
person like a lot of the stuff you do
need in person for sometimes but
virtual meetings are just going to get
better and better in the future and i'm
really excited about what that's going
to look like
all right uh happy hours versus some of
the in-person t-building stuff i think a
lot of companies had this idea before
the pandemic that their culture was like
kombucha on tap and posters on the walls
and i think we've hopefully all learned
that culture is so much more than that
it's like the decisions we're making
every day it's what gets rewarded and
punished in our businesses it's it's all
of these deeper things about
how we show up and this is where we can
set so many standards for
okay what really needs to be happening
in person we have a practice where our
our virtual teams do get together once
every year or so for a two-week
agile like meet up where the team is you
know in czechoslovakia or mexico city or
somewhere and they do have team building
in person the rest of the year they're
working
you know virtually and that is enough
you know some of those thoughtful
face-to-face meetings are enough to
carry them through the year we also have
practices where people do
fun things virtually you know they do
yoga classes cooking classes you know
meditation freelancers are all included
in those things so we intentionally
build that community with them
and uh this year as we've gotten people
really um
you know tired from all of the hard work
they've been doing we've been doing
charge up days which is a day off for
the company or two days off for the
whole company we pay the freelancers to
also take that time off so including
them in that community of you're part of
the team you take time off too has been
really important so that everybody is
part of
charging up
taking time off doing yoga you know
whatever it is it's again it's a single
community breaking down those barriers
so that it's not like employees over
here freelancers over here we do these
things together as a community and that
that goes a long way
all right this is a big one because i
think it benefits again not just your
freelancers but also your full team
we have to get over this idea of
facetime
like that has to be like dead like nail
in the coffin dead because
everyone in your company is so much more
empowered when you're when you're
judging them on are they building impact
nobody wants to be judged on facetime
nobody wants to think like do i have to
suck up to the boss today do i have to
like sit at my desk just to look like
i'm doing work
and we've seen that when you are
bringing freelancers into your team
they're they're judged on their impact
they're paid on their outputs so
bringing freelancers into your
organization forces you to really focus
on
am i do i am i clear on what am i trying
to get out of this project am i really
clear on the goals here because if i'm
not clear like i got to start there
before i hire this person just you know
start down this path put money into this
budget
so by forcing yourself to bring
freelancers then it's forcing you to
really get clear on what am i trying to
achieve because if i can't articulate
that like i got to start with that
problem
um so bringing freelancers in forces
that clarity and has forced us to really
get good at understanding for every
effort like what are we trying to
achieve if we can articulate that first
then we need to pause and not just start
putting bodies against the effort which
i think a lot of companies do
once you get good at that you basically
are getting everyone in the company to
be more empowered because they want to
be measured based on am i performing the
goals am i getting uh the achievements
there
and that really makes our workplaces
more equitable because then we're again
we're not going to fall into traps or
inadvertently promoting bias or
rewarding people who look good at their
jobs and may not be actually adding the
value that we're looking for
so most of you have seen this pyramid
before maslow's hierarchy of needs this
idea that there are kind of five
elements of the hierarchy where we need
to have our needs met at the bottom
first before we can move up the pyramid
towards realizing self-actualization
and really achieving our full potential
so it's a familiar triangle and i'm
introducing it today because um i
actually want to talk about uh this idea
of or meeting the organization's
hierarchy of needs but first uh maybe
some of you seen this version from from
this year
the 2021 version of
somehow they missed the hand sanitizer i
feel like that was some that should have
been somewhere down the bottom um but no
there's a version of this that i wanted
to share which i think is important for
thing about your organization's
hierarchy of needs like what are those
and this is a version that i think is
how a lot of companies
think about deploying freelancers for
their teams they think okay i'm going to
start with freelancers down here at the
bottom
with transactional work first i've got
some holes you know maybe sally's going
maternity leave or i've got this effort
where i know i can just put some
freelancers to work as a stop gap or to
fill in some issues where i've got some
things that need to be rescued
they get that done and then they think
wow that worked really well i'm now
going to go to the next level and think
about
maybe i can build my cx organization
strategically using freelance talent or
i can put a pod in place to help my fpa
team every quarter when they have a
spike in needs and that's going to be
something that's more of an ongoing need
and that's kind of a strategic usage of
freelance talent
then they go to the next level and they
start to think
wow
um now i'm realizing that there's this
world of talent
that can kind of meet my needs at any
moment
and that means i don't have to
have any barriers to what's possible and
that's when they've reached this nirvana
of
fulfilling their fullest dreams and
their biggest aspirations because how is
no longer constrained as i mentioned
earlier and i think this is where you
all can start to realize your full
potential for your companies by removing
that barrier of how and actually getting
to that full organizational
actualization for yourselves and your
companies which is my dream for all of
you
i wanted to share this quote from kevin
scott who is
one of our beloved customers a friend of
mine and someone who has really embraced
that he's the head of technology at pga
of america and he's basically said
it is this profound moment when you
realize
anything is possible
um because there's a freelancer anywhere
who can basically make that happen for
you
so
i wanted to land at the end on a couple
takeaways so first of all
we have been in this moment of crisis
and if you imagine that ski slope image
i shared at the beginning
we are at the dawning of this new era of
reimagining work so
we i think the next five years will be
ones of absolute tectonic change for how
workers work workers are wrestling for
control over their work schedules around
the boundaries between their work and
their lives
and you're going to have seen this i'm
sure you're already seeing this with the
people you're hiring with your own teams
and you as leaders really have this
chance to define new norms in your work
and what that looks like
so don't waste this opportunity to
really reimagine it's not time to fall
back into
you know
the traps of 2019 and before like this
is a moment to forge
new tracks in the snow and to really
reimagine what's possible
secondly i do think you already know as
leaders that who you have on your teams
is the difference maker you experience
that every day
and so thinking through
how do you lean into that and tap into
the talent that is anywhere in the world
for you and your teams and create that
flex for your organization so that you
have the agility
to really
move where you need to move for your
business in the next few years which
will be continue to be times of
incredible disruption and transformation
that's going to be a huge differentiator
um third one
i tried to do some myth busting for you
in terms of maybe some of the things
that are out there in terms of financers
being gig workers
not being here you know here today gone
tomorrow because they're not
these are highly skilled professionals
that i think can play across many many
different dimensions of your business if
you give them that opportunity and do
some of the things they're in context
setting onboarding etc
fourth i think your entire company will
be better and stronger if you focus on
really building the muscle for measuring
teams on productivity and outputs not
just on facetime and some of the things
that i think have become so habitualized
even we don't even realize it sometimes
but are probably not serving you and
your teams as leaders
and then finally if you think about that
organizational hierarchy of needs once
you really embrace this idea that there
is nothing you and your team cannot do
because there's always someone out there
who can do that work for you suddenly
you can dream bigger for your companies
and that is profoundly powerful
and i invite you to lean into really
that opportunity for yourselves and your
companies because that is
transformational i see that all the time
for us and for our customers and i hope
you can take advantage of that shift in
mindset and that huge opportunity for
your businesses so
thank you so much
[Music]
you